Panasas Touch Parallel File (tpf) Usage:

Touch Parallel File(tpf): Set or get the file mapping
attributes for the Panasas file system (panfs).
 
The tpf utility can be used to
(1) get the default file attributes for an existing directory,
(2) get the panfs attributes for an existing file, and
(3) set the panfs attributes for a new file or directory. If the "set" option
is called with an existing file name, a warning message will be
printed and no action will take place. If the "-force" flag is
used with the "set" option and if the file exists, it will be
destroyed and recreated with the user provided attributes. In
this case all data in the existing file will be lost.
The force option cannot be used with directories, i.e. a directory cannot be deleted and recreated with new parameters.
 
Usage:
tpf default write_path
where write_path is the path to a directory in a panfs file
system where the user has write privileges. A file will be created
and removed in this directory.
 
tpf get file_name
where file_name is the full path and name of an existing file in a panfs file system.
 
tpf set file_name -force -dir -stripe # -stride # -raid # -depth # -totalcomp #
where all flags are optional and are defined as:
"-force" allows the user to destroy and recreate a file with
         the specified input parameters.
"-dir" specifies that a directory should be created with the
         specified parameters. All files created in this directory will
         have the supplied attributes.
"-stripe" is the number of disks or blades to write your data
         across. The stripe may be any number between 1 and 10.
"-stride" is the number of bytes of data written to one disk
         before writing to the next disk. The stride must be at least
         1 KB (1024 bytes).
"-raid" is the RAID level of the file to be created. Allowable
         RAID levels: RAID 0 ("0")or RAID 5 ("5")
Note: RAID 5 is actually a parity stripe file, if the file is smaller than
        64 KB, the file will be mirrored and not striped.
"-depth" is used with RAID 5 and is the number of stripes
        written to a RAID before moving onto the next one adn mustbe greater than zero.
"-totalcomp" is used with RAID 5 and is total number of
        blades that the file will be striped over.



Quadrics/HP PFS Touch Parallel File (tpf) Usage:
 
Touch Parallel File(tpf): Set or get PFS mapping attributes.
 The tpf utility can be used to
          (1) get the default settings for an existing PFS, 
          (2) get the PFS attributes for an exiting file, and 
          (3) set the PFS attributes for a new file. If the \"set\" option
          is called with an existing file name, a warning message will be 
          printed and no action will take place. If the \"-force\" flag is
          used with the \"set\" option and if the file exists, it will be
          destroyed and recreated with the user provided PFS attributes. In
          this case all data in the existing file will be lost.
 
 Usage:
 tpf default write_path
 where write_path is the path to a directory where the user has
          write privileges on a PFS. A file, with random characters will be
          created and destroyed in this space.
 
 tpf get file_name
          where file_name is the full path and name of an existing file on a PFS.
 
 tpf set file_name -force -stripe # -stride # -start_iodevice #
 where all flags are optional and are defined as:
          -force allows the user to destroy and recreate a file with
          the specified input parameters.
          -stripe is the number of component file systems or disks
          to write your data across. The stripe may be any number
          between 1 and the number of component file systems.
          -stride is the number of bytes of data written to one disk
          before writing to the next disk. The stride must be at least
          64 KB (65536 bytes).
          -start_iodevice is the first disk to start writing data. The
          range of valid disk numbers is 0 to one less than the number
          of component file systems.
